Add getting started documentation (#29)
heroku/sf-functions-python: README.md

# sf-functions-python

Python support for [Salesforce Functions](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/platform/functions/overview).

> Note: This feature is in beta and has been released early so we can collect feedback. It may contain significant problems, undergo major changes, or be discontinued. The use of this feature is governed by the Salesforce.com Program Agreement.

---

# Getting Started with Python for Functions

## Prerequisites

> > Any install commands that follow assume a Mac OSX system with Homebrew available.  If you’re on another OS you’ll have to click through the links to get alternative install instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Any install commands that follow assume an Apple macOS system with Homebrew available.  If you’re on another OS you’ll have to click through the links to get alternative install instructions.
```

> ### [Install Python 3](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

Reviewer: This heading links to the Python site, which only has downloads for Windows.

Should we move this link out of the heading and put it alongside the Homebrew link below (and also explicitly label it as for other OSes), so they are side-by side?

Author: the page it leads me to provides an installer for my OS &  provides links out to other OS downloads.

```sh
brew install python3
```

> The installed Python version should be at least `3.10.6` or higher  

Reviewer: Where does the `3.10.6` come from? The latest 3.10.x is 3.10.9 (released just over a week ago), however any 3.10.x would probably do.

Author: i just took the versions off my local setup but i can change it to `3.10`

You can check this with `python3 --version`

> On some machines it’s necessary to run Python and Pip commands using python3 or pip3 which point to the Homebrew-managed Python interpreter versus running python or pip which tends to point at the system installed Python interpreter.  

### [Install Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

```sh
brew install git
```

The installed Git version should be at least `2.36.0` or higher

You can check this with `git --version`

### [Install / Update the Salesforce CLI](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.sfdx_setup.meta/sfdx_setup/sfdx_setup_install_cli_rc.htm)

If you haven’t already installed the Salesforce CLI, follow 
[these steps](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.sfdx_setup.meta/sfdx_setup/sfdx_setup_install_cli.htm). 

If you already have the Salesforce CLI installed, make sure it is updated to the latest release, which contains the Python 
functions support:

```sh
sfdx update
```

> This will update both the sfdx and sf commands.  Verify that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will update both the `sfdx` and `sf` commands.  Verify that:
```

* `sf --version` is `1.57.0` (or higher)

> * `sfdx --version` is `7.180.0` (or higher)

Author: the install command now states `sfdx update stable-rc` and i'm going to remove the comment on the `sfdx` version since any `sfdx` commands is this doc are already stable.

### [Create a SFDX Project](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/platform/functions/guide/create-dx-project.html)

> Functions must be located within a SFDX project so let’s create one.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions must be located within a SFDX project, so let’s create one.  
```

```sh
sf login org --alias PythonOrg --set-default-dev-hub --set-default
```

This will make **PythonOrg** the default Dev Hub for subsequent commands.

Then create a scratch org:

```sh
sfdx force:org:create \
  --definitionfile config/project-scratch-def.json \
  --setalias PythonScratch \
  --setdefaultusername
```

This will make it so that, when you run a Function, it will connect to and use the **PythonScratch** org.

### Connect Your Compute Environment

Login to Salesforce Functions with the same credentials you used to connect your Dev Hub org.

```sh
sf login functions
```

Then you will be able to create the compute environment and associate it with the **PythonScratch** org we created while
connecting your org.

```sh
sf env create compute \
  --connected-org PythonScratch \
  --alias PythonCompute
```

This will make it so that, when you deploy a Function, it will be deployed to the *PythonCompute* environment linked to 
your scratch org.

## Create and Run a Python Function Locally

### Generate the Python Function

From the SFDX project root, run:

```sh
sf generate function \
  --language python \
  --function-name hellopython
```

> The remaining commands will be executed within the newly generated project folder change to that folder by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining commands will be executed within the newly generated project folder. Change to that folder by running:
```

```sh
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

This will ensure your function has all dependencies it requires installed before you run it.  If you forgot to do this 
before starting the Function locally you’ll receive an error reminding you to perform this step.

### Run the Python Function Locally

```sh
sf run function start
```

This will start the function running locally on http://localhost:8080.  Messages logged by the running function will appear here.

### Invoke the Running Python Function

After starting the function:

* open a new command line terminal 
* navigate to the `hellopython` directory 
* invoke the function by sending it a payload

```sh
sf run function --function-url http://localhost:8080 --payload '{}'
```

## Deploy the Python Function

The following commands need to be executed from the **root of your SFDX project** so change into that directory now.

### Commit your changes to Git

All code changes made to a function will need to be staged and committed before you can deploy.

```sh

> git add . 

Reviewer: Ah so it's just occurred to me that the steps as written in this doc will have them git pushing the `venv` when they shouldn't. Whilst there is a GUS work item filed for coming up with something better longer term (eg switching to Poetry, or adding a `.gitignore` to the template), I think for this doc we need to either:
1. Have them create the venv outside of the project (eg `~/venvs/hellopython`)
2. or else have them `echo "venv/" > .gitignore` prior to running `git add`

I think perhaps (2) is best, since creating the venv inside the project at least means VSCode will auto-detect it whenever they open a console etc.

git commit -m "Trying out python functions"
```

> Once everything is committed to git run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once everything is committed to git, run:
```

```sh
sf deploy functions --connected-org PythonScratch
```

This deployment process may take several minutes.

### Invoke the Function from Apex

The easiest way to invoke the function deployed to our scratch org is with some Apex code.  Generate an Apex class with:

```sh
sfdx force:apex:class:create \
  --classname ApexTrigger \
  --outputdir force-app/main/default/classes
```

Open `force-app/main/default/classes/ApexTrigger.cls` and replace it with the following code:

```java
public with sharing class ApexTrigger {
    public static void runFunction() {
        System.debug('Running hellopython');
        functions.Function fn = functions.Function.get('PythonFunctionsAlpha.hellopython');
        functions.FunctionInvocation invocation = fn.invoke('{}');
        System.debug('Response: ' + invocation.getResponse());
    }
}
```

This code will:

> * Lookup the reference to our function using the functions.Function.get method 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Lookup the reference to our function using the `functions.Function.get` method 
```

* Invoke the function with an empty json payload
* Print the response

> Upload this Apex class to your scratch org with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upload this Apex class to your scratch org, with:
```

```sh
sfdx force:source:push --targetusername PythonScratch
```

> Open a developer console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a developer console:
```

```sh
sfdx force:org:open -p /_ui/common/apex/debug/ApexCSIPage
```

> And execute the function with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And execute the function, with:
```

```sh
echo "ApexTrigger.runFunction();" | sfdx force:apex:execute -f /dev/stdin
```

The developer console will show a log entry after the function executes which you can double-click to open.  Toggle the 

> Debug Only filter to reduce the log messages to just the ones from the ApexTrigger function.  You should see a view like 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debug Only filter to reduce the log messages to just the ones from the `ApexTrigger` function.  You should see a view like 
```

  --setdefaultusername
```

This will make it so that when you run a Function, it will connect to and use the **PythonScratch** org.

### Connect Your Compute Environment

Login to Salesforce Functions with the same credentials you used to connect your Dev Hub org.

```sh
sf login functions
```

Then you will be able to create the compute environment and associate it with the **PythonScratch** org we created while
connecting your org.

```sh
sf env create compute \
  --connected-org PythonScratch \
  --alias PythonCompute
```

This will make it so that when you deploy a Function, it will be deployed to the **PythonCompute** environment linked to 
your scratch org.

## Create and Run a Python Function Locally

### Generate the Python Function

From the SFDX project root, run:

```sh
sf generate function \
  --language python \
  --function-name hellopython
```

The remaining commands will be executed within the newly generated project folder change to that folder by running

```sh
cd functions/hellopython
```

### Create the Python [Virtual Environment](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html#creating-virtual-environments) & Install Dependencies

```sh
python3 -m venv venv

> source venv/bin/activate

Reviewer: On Windows unfortunately the command/path for activating the virtual environment is slightly different.

I just remembered we have docs for creating/activating venvs in the Heroku Python getting started guide, if it's helpful for inspiration?
https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/getting-started-with-python?singlepage=true#install-app-dependencies-locally

pip3 install -r requirements.txt

> echo "venv/" > .gitignore

Reviewer: I also spotted that we need to ignore the `__pycache__/` directories too.

with Functions.

And, to deploy any Salesforce Function, your SFDX project needs to be a git repo.  This is because the deployment process 
uses git tracked changes to figure out what to deploy.  Run the following commands to setup git:

```sh
git init
```

> It is not a requirement to push your code to GitHub or any other code hosting site.  Committing locally will work fine for deploying.  

### Connect Your Org

You’ll need to configure your Salesforce org to develop and invoke Salesforce Functions. Develop your functions in scratch 
orgs with Dev Hub or in sandbox orgs.  Follow the steps on 
[this page](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/platform/functions/guide/configure_your_org.html) to ensure everything 
is setup correctly first.

Once your Org is configured you can login and set it as the default Dev Hub with the following command:

```sh
sf login org --alias PythonOrg --set-default-dev-hub --set-default
```

This will make **PythonOrg** the default Dev Hub for subsequent commands.

Then create a scratch org:

```sh
sfdx force:org:create \
  --definitionfile config/project-scratch-def.json \
  --setalias PythonScratch \

>   --setdefaultusername

Reviewer: When I ran this command, I encountered an error:

```
Functions is not a valid Features value
```

This was when I'd logged into my dev org in the prior step, which it turns out did not have the Functions licence enabled.

Should we mention the need to have a functions licence enabled in the parent org first?

    <hasActivationRequired>true</hasActivationRequired>
    <label>Functions</label>
    <objectPermissions>
        <allowCreate>false</allowCreate>
        <allowDelete>false</allowDelete>
        <allowEdit>false</allowEdit>
        <allowRead>true</allowRead>
        <modifyAllRecords>false</modifyAllRecords>
        <object>Account</object>
        <viewAllRecords>false</viewAllRecords>
    </objectPermissions>
</PermissionSet>
```

Upload this permission set to your org:

```sh
sf deploy metadata --ignore-conflicts
```

Then assign the permissions to the `Functions` profile with

```sh
sfdx force:user:permset:assign -n Functions
```

## Create and Run a Python Function Locally

### Generate the Python Function

From the SFDX project root, run:

```sh
sf generate function \
  --language python \
  --function-name hellopython
```

The remaining commands will be executed within the newly generated project folder. Change to that folder by running:

```sh
cd functions/hellopython
```

You should also create a `.gitignore` file in the function directory with the following contents:
```gitignore
venv
__pycache__
```

The following command will do this for you:
```sh

> echo "venv\n__pycache__" > .gitignore

Reviewer: This needs to be `echo -e` otherwise the `\n` is interpreted as a literal, not the newline character, resulting in:

```
$ cat .gitignore 
venv\n__pycache__
```

I'll open a PR to fix.

Reviewer: Addressed in #34.

```

On a **Microsoft Windows system** you can activate the virtual environment with
```sh
.\venv\Scripts\activate
```

> For help with setting up a virtual environment, see the [Python documentation](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#creating-a-virtual-environment).

Finally, the dependencies can be installed into the newly created environment:

```sh
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

This will ensure your function has all dependencies it requires installed before you run it.  If you forgot to do this 
before starting the Function locally you’ll receive an error reminding you to perform this step.

### Run the Python Function Locally

```sh
sf run function start
```

This will start the function running locally on http://localhost:8080.  Messages logged by the running function will appear here.

### Invoke the Running Python Function

After starting the function:

* open a new command line terminal 
* navigate to the `hellopython` directory 
* invoke the function by sending it a payload

```sh
sf run function --function-url http://localhost:8080 --payload '{}'
```

## Deploy the Python Function

> The following commands need to be executed from the **root of your SFDX project** so change into that directory now.

Reviewer: I suspect some people might miss this mention (I did the first time through).
I think perhaps adding the `cd ../../` before the `git add` might make it harder to miss?

Reviewer: Addressed in #34.

### Commit your changes to Git

All code changes made to a function will need to be staged and committed before you can deploy.

```sh
git add . 
git commit -m "Trying out python functions"
```

Once everything is committed to git, run:

```sh

> sf deploy functions --connected-org PythonScratch

Reviewer: This command failed for me, with:

```
$ sf deploy functions --connected-org PythonScratch
Pushing changes to functions... failed
    Error: Request failed with status code 404
```

It looks like the guide is missing the "create the compute env" step?
https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/platform/functions/guide/deploy.html#create-the-compute-environment

After I ran this:

```
$ sf env create compute --connected-org PythonScratch --alias PythonEnv
Creating compute environment for org ID 00DJO00000004Rp2AI... done
New compute environment created with ID pythonf-00djo00000004rp2ai-670
Connecting environments... done
Your compute environment with local alias PythonEnv is ready.
```

...then the `sf deploy functions --connected-org PythonScratch` command worked.

Reviewer: Oh I missed this step in the guide (I was switching between the rendered view and raw markdown to leave review comments, so made it harder to keep track).

The 404 is pretty bad UX from the Salesforce CLI though - I'll file an issue to get that improved.

Reviewer: Short term I've added a note to the docs in #34:
https://github.com/heroku/sf-functions-python/blob/a7541831525ae1850ae2c8511d2b0c8f94597a53/README.md#L289

Longer term, I've filed GUS-W-12244992 for fixing `plugin-functions` to handle the 404 case gracefully - which it seems like it was supposed to be doing already, but isn't for some reason:
https://github.com/salesforcecli/plugin-functions/blob/6d8fb47c6927aa89d31eacf91069bae767ab5578/src/commands/deploy/functions.ts#L85-L96

```

Open `force-app/main/default/classes/ApexTrigger.cls` and replace it with the following code:

```java
public with sharing class ApexTrigger {
    public static void runFunction() {
        System.debug('Running hellopython');
        functions.Function fn = functions.Function.get('PythonFunctionsAlpha.hellopython');
        functions.FunctionInvocation invocation = fn.invoke('{}');
        System.debug('Response: ' + invocation.getResponse());
    }
}
```

This code will:

* Lookup the reference to our function using the `functions.Function.get` method 
* Invoke the function with an empty json payload
* Print the response

Upload this Apex class to your scratch org with

```sh
sfdx force:source:push --targetusername PythonScratch
```

Open a developer console:

```sh
sfdx force:org:open -p /_ui/common/apex/debug/ApexCSIPage
```

Then execute the function.

On a **macOS / Linux system** you can execute the function with:

```sh
echo "ApexTrigger.runFunction();" | sfdx force:apex:execute -f /dev/stdin
```

On a **Microsoft Windows system** you can execute the function with:

```sh
echo "FunctionApex.test();" | sfdx force:apex:execute
```

> The developer console will show a log entry after the function executes which you can double-click to open.  Toggle the 

Reviewer: It wasn't clear to me where I should be looking for this log entry. I was expecting something to appear in the main (middle) panel, when in fact the thing that appeared was in the bottom panel, and I had to double click that to get the middle panel to actually show anything. Whilst the current wording does mostly say that, this was still a bit counter-intuitive. 

Is this something people familiar with Salesforce will already know how to use, or do we need to tweak the wording here to make this even more obvious (eg mention "show a log entry in the bottom panel").

Reviewer: Addressed in #34.
